Blog post: Camel Quarkus 1.0.0 (#454)
apache/camel-website: content/blog/2020/08/camel-quarkus-release-1.0.0/index.md

---
title: "Camel Quarkus 1.0.0 Released"
date: 2020-08-10
authors: ["ppalaga"]
categories: ["Releases", "Camel Quarkus"]
preview: What's new in Camel Quarkus 1.0.0
---

> <sub><sup>Original image by <a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:99of9">Toby Hudson</a> <a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0">CC BY-SA 3.0</a> via <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camel_racing#/media/File:CamelRacingCamelCup2009Heat.JPG">Wikipedia</a></sup></sub>

Reviewer: Might make sense to add [manual summary](https://gohugo.io/content-management/summaries/#front-matter-summary), this bit ends up in the [blog post list](https://deploy-preview-454--camel.netlify.app/blog/).

Author: Let me add a summary

---
title: "Camel Quarkus 1.0.0 Released"
date: 2020-08-10
authors: ["ppalaga"]
categories: ["Releases", "Camel Quarkus"]
preview: What's new in Camel Quarkus 1.0.0
---

<sub><sup>Original image by <a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:99of9">Toby Hudson</a> <a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0">CC BY-SA 3.0</a> via <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camel_racing#/media/File:CamelRacingCamelCup2009Heat.JPG">Wikipedia</a></sup></sub>

The Apache Camel community celebrates the release 1.0.0 of Camel Quarkus!

## What is Camel Quarkus?

Camel Quarkus brings the outstanding integration capabilities of Apache Camel to [Quarkus](https://quarkus.io/) - the

> toolkit for writing subatomically small and supersonically fast Java, Kotlin and Scala applications. In addition to

Reviewer 2: I am not so sure Quarkus is well known for fast Scala applications. I dont think the Scala community think of Quarkus as a Scala framework they are using. I dont think you can find Scala mentioned on the quarkus website.

I would remove Scala.

Author: OK, let's remove Scala. Although there is scala extension and scala should work, it is not especially promoted from the Quarkus side.

memory consumption and start time improvements on stock JVMs, Quarkus also allows for compiling applications to
[native executables](https://camel.apache.org/camel-quarkus/latest/user-guide/first-steps.html#_package_and_run_the_application)
thus improving the performance characteristics even more.

Camel Quarkus is suitable not only for creating long living services and potentially short living serverless
applications but also for
[command-style applications](https://camel.apache.org/blog/2020/07/command-line-utility-with-camel-quarkus/)
that execute some specific task (or wait for some specific condition) and exit.

## Developer joy

Writing integrations has never been more joyful for developers than with Camel Quarkus:

* Easy to start with: either via [code.quarkus.io](https://code.quarkus.io/) or using `mvn quarkus:create`
* The "live coding" feature, a.k.a. `mvn compile quarkus:dev` shortens your development iterations - check
  [this 2 mins video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4lXSf8DBQkQ)
* Easy to test using JUnit 5 extensions
* Hides the complexity of the native compilation using [GraalVM](https://www.graalvm.org/) or
  [Mandrell](https://github.com/graalvm/mandrel)

> Check our https://camel.apache.org/camel-quarkus/latest/user-guide/first-steps.html[User guide]!

Reviewer 2: In preview then this link looked broken.

## Camel components coverage

Since the [early beginnings](https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/0.11.0/extensions/camel) the number of supported
Camel bits went up substantially. As of Quarkus 1.0.0 and
Camel 3.4, Camel Quarkus supports:

* 155 out of 350 Camel components (44%)
* 27 out of 43 Camel data formats (63%)
* 13 out of 17 Camel languages (76%)
* 17 out of 42 miscellaneous Camel components (40%)

Some of these are supported in JVM mode only - please refer to the
[complete list](https://camel.apache.org/camel-quarkus/latest/list-of-camel-quarkus-extensions.html) for details.

## Bootstrapping methods

There are two ways to bootstrap and configure Camel Quarkus:

1. Bare
2. With Camel Main

Both methods configure and start a Camel Context for you. The main difference is in how much the resulting Camel Context
obeys the conventions known from Camel on other platforms. If you like to configure your routes using
`camel.component.*` properties, then you need to add the `camel-quarkus-main` dependency and the properties

> will work as usual on Camel standalone or Camel SpringBoot. Of course, this brings some overhead. You may prefer this

Reviewer 2: Spring Boot (there is a space between)

Reviewer 2: Of course this brings some overhead? What overhead and why of course. From end user perspectice this may actually be easier. Its more flexible and works better for externalized configuration.

I would tone down this as it seems you are saying "dont do this".

Author: The additional dependency brings both build time and runtime overhead. That's true for almost any dependency and that's why I said 'of course'. I admit I do not have any exact data and I admit the overhead might be negligible for basic applications. IIRC, less overhead was one of the motivations for not including main by default. I fully second the UX argument, and based on that, I was rather opposing not including main by default. It is definitely good that we discuss how to present this option. Let me think how to formulate it better.

Reviewer 3: I think this just boils down how you want to use camel-quarkus: as a library or as an application runtime.

IMHO, camel-quarkus-core is for embedding camel functionalities with full control, whereas camel-quarkus-main is mainly for application.

Author: I decided to remove the sentence. Thanks for the feedback.

option if you used Camel before or if you are migrating from other platform.

> If you rather come from the Quarkus side and you never wrote Camel integrations before, you may choose to use the bare

Reviewer 2: I would say from CDI side - its not really Quarkus side. CDI is a bit "coding heavy" in terms of configuration as this requires Java coding and adding annotations and whatnot.

It reads as if it is two "big" alternatives, that you cannot use CDI with Camel Main, and vice versa.

Author: > I would say from CDI side

Good idea.

> It reads as if it is two "big" alternatives, that you cannot use CDI with Camel Main, and vice versa.

Good point, the text should not awake that impression.

Author: > > It reads as if it is two "big" alternatives, that you cannot use CDI with Camel Main, and vice versa.
> 
> Good point, the text should not awake that impression.

Adding `You can configure Camel using CDI even if you have Camel Main in your application.`

bootstrap and configure your routes using CDI.

See the [Bootstrap section](https://camel.apache.org/camel-quarkus/latest/user-guide/bootstrap.html) of the User guide
for more details.

## CDI

CDI plays a central role in Quarkus and Camel Quarkus offers a first class support for it too. You may use `@Inject`,
`@ConfigProperty` and other annotations e.g. to inject beans and configuration values to your Camel RouteBuilder's.
See the [CDI section](https://camel.apache.org/camel-quarkus/latest/user-guide/cdi.html) of the User guide for more
details.

## Native mode

As mentioned above, Quarkus brings the option to compile an application to native executable. Compared to running on
JVM, native applications start faster, require less memory at runtime and are also smaller on disk.

However, the native compilation with GraalVM is all but easy and straightforward. First, there are
[limitations](https://github.com/oracle/graal/blob/master/substratevm/LIMITATIONS.md) for what your code and all your

> dependencies may or may not do. Second, the native compiler needs to be configured through many options that may

Reviewer 2: may or may not be easy -> not easy

I dont think anything with graalvm is easy for the average user.

Author: Yeah, shorter is better.

---
title: "Camel Quarkus 1.0.0 Released"
date: 2020-08-10
authors: ["ppalaga"]
categories: ["Releases", "Camel Quarkus"]
preview: The first stable release of Camel Quarkus

> summary: Walk through the highlights of the first stable release: Developer joy, Camel component coverage, Bootstrap, CDI, native mode and more!

Author: @zregvart I hope this would work as a summary?

Reviewer: Looks [good](https://deploy-preview-454--camel.netlify.app/blog/).

---
title: "Camel Quarkus 1.0.0 Released"

> date: 2020-07-07

Author: Yes, thanks for catching it! A copy-and-paste problem :)

> date: 2020-07-07

Reviewer: I usually take one from [unsplash](https://unsplash.com/s/photos/camel)

authors: ["ppalaga"]
categories: ["Releases", "Camel Quarkus"]
preview: What's new in Camel Quarkus 1.0.0
---

> Apache Camel community celebrates the release 1.0.0 of Camel Quarkus!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Apache Camel community celebrates the 1.0.0 release of Camel Quarkus!
```

Author: +1

## What is Camel Quarkus?

Camel Quarkus brings the outstanding integration capabilities of Apache Camel to [Quarkus](https://quarkus.io/) - the
toolkit for writing subatomically small and supersonically fast Java, Kotlin and Scala applications.

It is suitable not only for creating long living services and potentially short living serverless applications
but also for [command-style applications](https://camel.apache.org/blog/2020/07/command-line-utility-with-camel-quarkus/)
that execute some task and exit.

## Developer joy

Writing integrations has never offered more developer joy than with Camel Quarkus:

* Easy to start with: either via [code.quarkus.io](https://code.quarkus.io/) or using `mvn quarkus:create`
* The "live coding" feature, a.k.a. `mvn compile quarkus:dev` shortens your development iterations
* Easy to test using JUnit 5 extensions

> * Shields from the complexity of the native compilation using [GraalVM](https://www.graalvm.org/) or

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Hides the complexity of the native compilation using [GraalVM](https://www.graalvm.org/) or
```

Author: Thanks!

contributions.

## Where are we now?

Since the early beginnings the number of supported Camel bits went up substantially. These are the numbers of Camel
components supported on Quarkus as of Quarkus 1.0.0 and Camel 3.4:

* 155 out of 350 Camel components (44%)
* 27 out of 43 Camel data formats (63%)
* 13 out of 17 Camel languages (76%)
* 17 out of 42 miscellaneous Camel components (40%)

The complete list is [here](https://camel.apache.org/camel-quarkus/latest/list-of-camel-quarkus-extensions.html)

## Who is using Camel Quarkus?

While we mostly have only indirect information about the usage via
[GitHub issues](https://github.com/apache/camel-quarkus/issues), there is one prominent user, we are especially proud
of: [Camel K](https://camel.apache.org/camel-k/latest/index.html). As of
[Camel K 1.0](https://camel.apache.org/blog/2020/06/camel-k-release-1.0.0#fast-startup-and-low-memory), Camel Quarkus is
one of the two supported runtimes and is "is expected to be the default underlying runtime in the next release".

## Highlights of the release 1.0.0

TODO:
bootstrapping methods

> reflectionless

Reviewer 4: > reflectionless

We can't really make that claim yet as https://github.com/apache/camel-quarkus/issues/1108 wont be fixed until we get an updated Camel release.

Author: Indeed, let me remove it.
